Close application (#296)
DFE-Digital/bat-design-history: app/posts/manage-teacher-training-applications/2021-01-06-closing-an-application.md

It’s not always clear to providers what the difference is between rejection and withdrawal.

And an application can not be always be closed depending on the status. For example, if a candidate stops responding after they accept an offer, there’s no way to close the application besides marking a condition as not met.

## Why are we doing this?

We’re doing this work to:

- make it easier for providers to choose the right action without getting hung up on terminology
- let providers close an application at any time throughout the application process
- allow providers to process applications where candidates have disappeared or stopped responding
- give providers confidence that they won’t get punished about rejecting an application
- give candidates useful feedback about why they were unsuccessful
- allow candidates to be withdrawn at their request
- make sure DfE can accurately differentiate between withdrawals and rejections

## What outcomes are we looking for

- less or no support requests to close applications

> - less or no applications being incorrectly marked as automatically rejected or automatically declined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- fewer or no applications being incorrectly marked as automatically rejected or automatically declined
```

- more candidates applying again and being successful when they do

## What we did and why

> - Replaced the words ‘reject application’ and ‘withdraw offer’ to ‘Close application’ so that users do not get hung up on terminology

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replaced the words ‘reject application’ and ‘withdraw offer’ with ‘close application’ so that users do not get hung up on terminology.
```

> - Replace ‘Declined’, ‘Rejected’, ‘Offer withdrawn’ and ‘Application withdrawn’ statuses with ‘Closed’

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Replace ‘Declined’, ‘Rejected’, ‘Offer withdrawn’ and ‘Application withdrawn’ statuses with ‘Closed’.
```

> - Always let users close an application (unless it’s already been closed) so that there’s a consistent way to close an application regardless of the status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Always let users close an application (unless it’s already been closed) so that there’s a consistent way to close an application regardless of the status.
```

> - Kept all questions on the first screen for closing an application as it’s more work to split them up for this round of research

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kept all questions on the first screen for closing an application as it’s more work to split them up for this round of research.
```

> - We put questions that are not a reflection of the candidate toward the bottom of the form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Put questions that do not relate to candidate's behaviour or the quality of their application toward the bottom of the form.
```

> - Once an offer has been made, irrelevant questions like safeguarding and performance at interview are removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Removed irrelevant questions like safeguarding and performance at interview from the form once an offer has been made.
```

> - Let providers give additional feedback when the course is full because if the candidate was poor, then the course being full is not the main reason for closing the application

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean here.

> - Let users navigate easily to change the status of a condition if they choose ‘Close application’ when in the ‘Accepted’ state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Let users navigate easily to change the status of a condition if they choose ‘Close application’ when in the ‘Accepted’ state.
```

> - Kept the ‘performance at interview’ question in the ‘Received’ state because a provider may not use the interview feature

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean here – how is keeping the question related to whether the provider uses the feature?

> ## Giving a choice back to candidates under certain circumstances

Reviewer: Is it worth including this given that we aren't tackling it in this version?

We think that candidates should be given a choice back if their application is closed through no fault of their own. For example, when the course is full.

## Other options we discarded for now

We originally put ‘Close application’ in a sidebar on the application page.

> But from previous reseach and on the basis that we currently have ‘Withdraw offer’ on the offer page, we think that users will need to close an application from the offer page (and potentially other pages).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But from previous research and on the basis that we currently have ‘Withdraw offer’ on the offer page, we think that users will need to close an application from the offer page (and potentially other pages).
```

We also tried to only show ‘Close application’ under the candidate’s name when in the offered, accepted and conditions met states. This seemed sensible on the basis that the prompts let users close the application - like when making a decision.

> But that meant an application couldn’t be closed when in the deferred state. So we decided to put ‘Close application’ just under the name at all times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But that meant an application couldn’t be closed when in the deferred state. So we decided to put ‘Close application’ under the name at all times.
```

## What we want to know from research

- Do users understand what ‘Close application’ means?
- Can users figure out how to close an application when their mental model is to withdraw an application?
- Do some users go to close an application when they want to mark a condition as not met?
- Do users need to distinguish between applications that were closed for different reasons on the application list?
- Do users mistake ‘Close application’ for going back to the application list?

## Other things to explore later

> - Maybe the reason about qualifications overlaps with why a condition was not met. For example, they could not provide evidence of a qualification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rejection due to qualifications may overlap with why a condition was not met. For example, the candidate could not provide evidence of a qualification.
```

> - The ‘offered a place elsewhere’ reason could a dedicated flow once UCAS is gone because Manage knows that a place was offered elsewhere. Peraps it could even be automated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The ‘offered a place elsewhere’ reason could a dedicated flow once UCAS is gone because Manage knows that a place was offered elsewhere. Perhaps it could even be automated.
```

- We currently skip the ‘other advice’ question when safeguarding and honesty is given as a reason. Maybe this is wrong?

> - We currently skip the ‘Future applications’ question when safeguarding, honesty and other offer is given as a reason. Maybe this is wrong?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We currently skip the ‘future applications’ question when safeguarding, honesty or other offer are given as a reason. Maybe this is wrong?
```
